ASSAM : In the last week of April, Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal took stock of the state’s flood preparedness. Less than a month later, the river Brahmaputra swelled up and has been in spate ever since. In spite of the CM’s directives, the state administration seems to have been caught unawares. At least 65 people have lost their lives. More than 35 lakh people in 26 districts of the state have been affected. Nearly 90 per cent of the Kaziranga National Park is reportedly submerged.
Floods are a recurrent feature during the monsoons in Assam. In fact, ecologists point out that flood waters have historically rejuvenated croplands and fertilised soil in the state’s alluvial areas. But it’s also a fact that for more than 60 years, the Centre and state governments have not found ways to contain the toll taken by the raging waters. The state has primarily relied on embankments to control floods. This flood control measure was introduced in Assam in the early 1950s when the hydrology of most Indian rivers, including the Brahmaputra, was poorly understood.
There is, today, a substantial amount of scholarly work that has highlighted the problems of using large walls to check the Brahmaputra’s flow. The river changes course frequently and it’s virtually impossible to contain it within embankments. Moreover, the pressure of the surging water takes a toll on these walls and they need constant reinforcement — by all accounts, that hasn’t happened in Assam. Several of the state’s embankments were reportedly breached by the floods this year.
Large parts of Guwahati are under water. The city has been getting flooded during the monsoons since the past seven years. Its problems have less to do with the vagaries of nature.
The document also notes that rainwater from Meghalaya and the surrounding hills often causes flash floods in Guwahati. However, recognition of the problem has not led to any meaningful conversation between the two states on flood control. In fact, authorities in all the states that share the Brahmaputra basin need to urgently put their heads together to resolve the perennial problem of floods in Assam.
As many as 66 animals have died as the floods-water submerged in Assam's Kaziranga national park, an official had said on Wednesday. P Shivkumar, Director of Kaziranga national park, informed that Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal will be visiting the area to inspect the current situation.
"This year's flood was among the highest floods in the states. So far, 66 animals have died and 170 animals have been rescued from the national park," he said.
The forest officials are being assisted by the civil administration, police administration and the villagers in the area, he said.
Besides erosion of river banks at a large number of places, roads, embankments, bridges, culverts and other infrastructure have been damaged at many locations in the flood-affected districts, the ASDMA officials said, adding that several hundred houses were fully or partially damaged due to the flood.